Title: Text

----

Text: 

Since I was a child in Iraq, I have always held strong prejudices against my country believing life in the west was paradise.  When I was born in 1987, my country was already fighting a brutal war with our neighbor Iran; a bloody and protracted conflict lasting eight years.

Then in 1990, Saddam Hussain invaded Kuwait, a military intervention which would result in a seven-month-long brutal occupation of that country and the subsequent invasion of United States; an onslaught that would result in the deaths of tens of thousands of ordinary Iraqis and devastate the lives of millions more.

This was the country I was born into. A country scarred by war and without hope. Thinking about this then, I couldn’t help but think how unlucky I had been to have born in such a country – a country of such immeasurable suffering. On top of that, I was Yazidi, a minority scorned by the Iraqi society with limited prospects for a better future.

That belief changed, however, following a simple encounter in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul that would change my life forever. While returning home from school one day, I came across a man selling books in the street. Curious, I began randomly flipping through the pages of a photography book he was selling and found myself memorized by what I saw. So many images, so many faces; each with its own story to tell.

As I continued looking through the book, I came across a quote in the middle of the page. "God gives his hardest battles to his strongest soldiers,” it read.

As I reread those words, I was intrigued by its meaning. Suddenly, and without thinking about it, I felt a sense of purpose and understood why I had been born where I had been born. Indeed, my birthplace predestined my very being.  From that point on, rather than look at Iraq negatively, I decided to embrace it instead. My country was who I was. The sounds, the faces, the images – the very essence of its people.

I have always believed that life always tries to reach you and help you achieve your goals, but you have to allow it and accept and listen to its messages. Those word were a message.

From that point on, I began furthering my knowledge; reading anything I could about music, photography, film making, and other things.  It felt so natural and exactly what the universe wanted.  I felt blessed at being born in Iraq and privileged of the opportunities it offered me. Such experiences – oblique as they might seem – provided me a perspective I would never enjoy in the west. The challenges of Iraq made me stronger as a person. And by focusing on the positive, anything was possible.

As a Yazidi in Iraq, I witnessed discrimination and difficult times; experiences which have made me stronger as a person and made me who I am today.   When ISIS seized control of a large part of northern Iraq in 2014, my family, like so thousands of others fled with little more than the clothes on our backs – the majority to the Kurdistan region of the country, joining up with other minority groups like the Christians, Shabaks, Kakaiee, and Turkmans who had once lived among us.

But the real story of this exodus, returning, resilience, has never been told through photography, a documentation I’m keen to take forward.   Following the liberation of the area by Iraqi and Kurdish forces, I rushed to my hometown of Bashiqa with my camera in hand. At first sight of the town, I was shocked by the level of destruction, looted and burned homes and destroyed property around me. Not a single Yazidi place of worship, Christian church or Muslim mosques was left unscathed, while schools and health centers lay decimated.  
From that point on, I began highlighting the return of my people and the positive efforts they undertook to rebuild their lives.

As a Yazidi, becoming a displaced person and part of a humanitarian crisis which I could never imagine myself being in, made me think deeply. Either I accept what happened to me or do something using my skills.
By thinking this way, I felt stronger, proactively documenting the photos and stories of my community.  
I started to follow people’s journeys who have lost everything and document their displacement stories, returning, and resilience and the positive efforts they undertook to rebuild their lives again and the idea of this community and their level of awareness and acceptance to each other.

The idea of this community and their level of awareness and acceptance to each other is a sign of strength and will inspire others in the future.

What inspired me is the strong determination of the affected people to face this crisis with hopeful attitude toward their recent negative situation at that time. The hope that they had made them go through this situation and return to their homelands.